---
title: "Post: Quickly Search and Filter Your Text Data with Python's Regular Expression (Regex) Module"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
date: 2021-01-10T15:34:30-04:00
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Python
  - Data Manipulation
---
### What to expect:

- Understand how to use Python's `re` module to perform searching in text files
- See examples of regex patterns and methods
- Explore how to use matched results for further processing
- Be aware of resources to test and learn

---

Whether you are a product manager, a business development manager, a user researcher, or any other role in this all-things-digital age, efficiently processing raw data to **generate insights** has become a crucial skillset. 

Be it a simple text file, perhaps a scanned pdf, at times we just use the built in find/ search functions, mannually skimming throught the matched items with our eysballs, copy-pasting the pieces we find useful to another documents, making some mistakes and doing this all over again.

It does not have to be that way. It really doesn't. With some simple Python scripts, you can easily extract the desirable pieces and never miss a thing. 

Regular expression, known as regex, is a sequence of characters that specifies a search pattern. Very often, these patterns are used to validate, find and replace input text-string related data.

You can write a minial function with just a few lines of code, it will then scan through your documents and help you manage search results at ease. Such a powerful technique!

**NOTE**

If you are new to regex, **don't panic**. The patterns may look like alien languages at the first sight, and it can be counter-intuitive to understand. 

The good news is, there are tons of free tools and documentations for us to test and learn. I will share a few of the most practical reources at the end of this article.

You can always refer to the resources to strengthen your memory. Just sit back and relax!

---
### 1. Design a pattern, apply it to a regex method
In Python's regex module `re`, the `findall()` function will return all matched results from the input in a list format.

Here's an example text string:

`"John was initially the group's de facto leader, a role gradually ceded to Paul. from 1968 to 1972, he produced more than a dozen records with Yoko, including a trilogy of avant-garde albums."`

```
import re

sample_text = "Lennon was initially the group's de facto leader, a role gradually ceded to McCartney. from 1968 to 1972, he produced more than a dozen records with Ono, including a trilogy of avant-garde albums."

pattern = r'[A-Z][a-z]+'
matched_results = re.findall(pattern, sample_text)

print(matched_results)

```
Result:
```
['John', 'Paul', 'Yoko']
```

--- 
### 2. Connect with other Python methods

Combine with `open()` and `read()` method, you can perform searching in text files:

```
with open ("filepath/filename.extention", "r") as file:
    txt_obj = file.read()

# below is an example pattern to find all strings that are on the same line and before ": "
# (?=) is called a "Positive Lookahead" pattern

pattern = '(.+)(?=: )' 
matched_results = re.findall(pattern, txt_obj)

```
---
### 3. Turing search results into structural data

Let's see another example of how we can incorporate regex functions to transform text data into a structural, refined dataset, with a simple line of code.

First, let's take a look at Python's list comprehension expression. It makes data transformation as simple as one line of code:

```
new_list = [item.someMethod() for item in old_list]
```

Using list comprehension along with regex function `finditer()` and `goupdict()`, we can perform searching with multiple targets in mind, and put results in a dictionary format.

Let's day we have a log file of user behavior data, and we have to extract the username and timestamp data for each user.

We can first design a pattern with 2 regex expression groups using (?P):

```
pattern = "((?P<user_name>\w*|-)(\s)(\[(?P<timestamp>.+)\])(\s))" 

result = [item.groupdict() for item in re.finditer(pattern, txt_obj)]
```

Note that during handling from `.groupdic()`, the `<tag_name>` will become keys in the dictionary, while matched results (`item`) would be assigned as the values.

---
### Tools and Documentations:

An regex pattern testing tool with a table of commonly used patterns- you can mix and match the patterns to see how things work:

http://www.pyregex.com

If you want to understand more about each expression, this blogpost from Dataquest comes in handy:

https://www.dataquest.io/blog/regex-cheatsheet/

To explore all the other methods in the `re` module, here's the official documentaion: 

https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html

Going further- this is another regex testing tool, you can see how regex is used across different languages (e.g. PHP/ Java). You can also find the explanations of different patterns on the reference panels.
 
https://regex101.com
